Incremental measurement of long-running tasks (#3)
lawrencejones/blog.lawrencejones.dev: _posts/2019-04-19-incremental-measurement.md

# TYPE job_worked_seconds_total counter
job_worked_seconds_total{job}
```

By tracking the sum of seconds spent working each job type, the rate at which
the metric changes can identify how much worker time has been consumed. An
increase of 15 over an interval of 15s implies a single continuously occupied
worker (one second for every second that elaspes) while an increase of 30 would
imply two workers, etc.

Graphing worker activity during this incident should show us what we were up to.
Doing so results in this sad graph, with the time of incident (16:02-16:04)
marked with an appropriately alarming red arrow:

<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/images/long-tasks-hole-in-metrics.png" | prepend:site.baseurl }}" alt="hole in worker metrics around incident"/>
  <figcaption>
    Worker activity at time of incident with a notable gap
  </figcaption>
</figure>

As the person debugging this mess, it hurt me to see the graph flatline at
exactly the time of the incident. I'd already checked the logs so I knew the
workers were busy- not only that, but the large blue spike at 16:05? It's time
spent working webhooks, for which we run twenty dedicated workers. How could ten

> single threaded workers spend 45s per second working?

Author: Yep, the ten is just a typo. Get's confusing when you simplify numbers on the fly for this type of content!

## Where it all went wrong

The incident graph is lying to us by both hiding and over-reporting work
depending on where you take the measurement. Understanding why requires us to
consider the implementation of the metric tracking and how that interacts with
Prometheus taking the measurements.

Starting with how workers take measurements, we can sketch an implementation of
the worker process below. Notice that workers will only update the metric after
the job has finished running.

```ruby
class Worker
  JobWorkedSecondsTotal = Prometheus::Client::Counter.new(...)

  def work
    job = acquire_job
    start = Time.monotonic_now
    job.run
  ensure # run after our main method block
    duration = Time.monotonic_now - start
    JobWorkedSecondsTotal.increment(by: duration, labels: { job: job.class })
  end
end
```

Prometheus (with its pull-based metrics philosophy) makes a GET request to each
worker every 15s to record the metric values at the request time. As workers
constantly update the job worked metric, over time we can plot how this value
has changed.

> We start seeing our over/under-reporting issue when jobs take longer than the

Author: Yep this is true, and worth rephrasing. It's for any measurement taken over the boundary of a scrape.

interval Prometheus scrapes (15s). Imagine a job that takes 1m to execute:
Prometheus will scrape the worker four times in that interval, but the metric
value will only be updated after the fourth scrape.

Drawing a timeline of worker activity can make it clear how the moment we update
our metric affects what Prometheus sees. In the diagram below, we map the
timeline of two workers into chunks that represent jobs of varying duration. Two
Prometheus scrapes are labelled at 15s (red) and 30s (blue), with the jobs that
contribute to the metric value at each scrape coloured accordingly.

<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/images/long-tasks-bias-diagram.svg" | prepend:site.baseurl }}" alt="diagram of bias"/>

> </figure>

Reviewer: I'm not sure what it is - I know this diagram is explained but I had to read it a few times to really understand what I was seeing. I wonder if there's a tweak which would help.

Maybe something to help indicate that the workers report at the end of their job, which increases the counter value, then you can show the scrapes reading that value every 15s?

Maybe I'm overthinking but I _did_ read the diagram a few times, which I thought worth noting.

Reviewer: Maybe moving the durations above-right of each job rectangle as a `+` in the colour, rather than in the box, to make it clearer when they "take effect".

Something like this (terrible example but you get the idea):

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/510845/57544361-041b0100-734f-11e9-826e-dc61ef0a2dfb.png)

Or even:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/510845/57544498-6b38b580-734f-11e9-84c0-b5b4efda49d7.png)

etc?

Reviewer: Ah, your image further down is actually kind of in line with what I was thinking, too

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/510845/57544972-d5058f00-7350-11e9-9e03-d761c1108bc5.png)

Irrespective of what they work, two fully occupied workers will perform 30s of
work in every 15s interval. As Prometheus doesn't see work until it's complete,
our metric implies 14s of work happened in the first interval and 42s in the
second. If every worker starts working long jobs, we'll report no work being
done until they end, even if that's hours later.

> To demonstrate this effect, I created an experiment with ten workers working

Reviewer: I think it'd be cool to also show something which "looks legit-ish" either before or after this next section.

i.e., if you have thousands of tiny jobs, things look kind of like you'd expect, at least enough to go unnoticed. However, as you increase the job time/add slower jobs (as you have here), you can show that these graphs become downright dangerous.

This has the added benefit of explaining how it's easy to miss this until it's too late - you start with small quick jobs  but if/when they slow down, they  take  your metrics down with them!

Author: Ah, this is a great idea. Showing it degrade would be lovely.

jobs of varying duration half-normally distributed between 0.1s and 30s (see
[seed-jobs](https://gist.github.com/lawrencejones/f419e478106ab1ecbe007e7d9a9ca937#file-seed-jobs)).
Despite each worker performing a constant rate of work, graphing the job worked
metric results in a spiky graph that jumps above and below the real measurement

> of 10s per second of work:

Reviewer: 10s of work per second?

<figure>
	<a target="_blank" href="https://snapshot.raintank.io/dashboard/snapshot/r9cBxt26Bs1PBI3mqfTS72Cf55dSmeTn">
  	<img src="{{ "/assets/images/long-tasks-experiment-bias.png" | prepend:site.baseurl }}" alt="work by worker with biased measurement"/>
	</a>
  <figcaption>
    Work by worker with biased measurement- under and over reporting
  </figcaption>
</figure>

This biased metric will record no work while we work the longest of jobs, and
place spikes of activity only after they've subsided. But as if this wasn't bad
enough, there's an even more insidious problem with the long-lived jobs that so
screw with our metrics.

Whenever a long-lived job is terminated, say if Kubernetes evicts the pod or a
node dies, what happens with the metrics? As we update metrics only after
completing the job, as far as the metrics are concerned, all that work **never
happened**.

## Restoring trust

> Metrics aren't meant to lie to you. Beyond the existential crisis prompted by

Reviewer: 😂 - enjoyed this section

to ask the tracer to update our metric before we serve the Prometheus scrape,
which we can do by configuring a Rack middleware.

```ruby
# config.ru
# https://rack.github.io/

class WorkerCollector
  def initialize(@app, workers: @workers); end

  def call(env)
    workers.each(&:collect)
    @app.call(env) # call Prometheus::Exporter
  end
end

# Rack middleware DSL
workers = start_workers # Array[Worker]

# Run the collector before serving metrics
use WorkerCollector, workers: workers
use Prometheus::Middleware::Exporter
```

Rack is a Ruby webserver interface that allows chaining several actions into a
single endpoint. The above `config.ru` defines a Rack app that, whenever it
receives a request, will first call `collect` on all the workers, then have the
Prometheus client render scrape results. 

Returning to our diagram, this means we update the metric whenever the job ends
or we receive a scrape. The jobs that span across scrapes contribute fairly on
either side, as shown by the jobs straddling the 15s scrape time splitting their
duration evenly. Regardless of the size of our jobs, we've incremented the

> metric by 30s (2 x 15s) for each scrape interval.

Reviewer: Roughly - or specifically? Presumably this will still be somewhat either side of 30s due to the timings of the request? Kind of fine, but might be worth mentioning?

<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/images/long-tasks-diagram-tracer.svg" | prepend:site.baseurl }}" alt="diagram of tracer collection"/>
</figure>

### Is it better?

Using the tracer has a night-and-day impact on how worker activity is recorded.
Unlike the original measurements where our activity was spiky, with peaks that
exceeded the number of workers we were running and periods of total silence,
re-running our experiment with ten workers produces a graph that clearly shows
each worker contributing evenly to the reported work.

<figure>
	<a target="_blank" href="https://snapshot.raintank.io/dashboard/snapshot/r9cBxt26Bs1PBI3mqfTS72Cf55dSmeTn">
  	<img src="{{ "/assets/images/long-tasks-experiment-before-after.png" | prepend:site.baseurl }}" alt="comparison of biased vs tracer results"/>
	</a>
  <figcaption>
    Comparison of biased (left) and tracer managed (right) metrics, taken from
    the same worker experiment
  </figcaption>

> </figure>

Reviewer: Images are the wrong way round (or captions, but I'd swap images and do "before" on the left)

In comparison to the outright misleading and chaotic graph from our original
measurements, metrics managed by the tracer are stable and consistent. Not only

> do we accurately assign work to each scrape but we are now indifferent to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
do we accurately reflect seconds worked on each scrape but we are now indifferent to
```
